JEREMY: In today's
video, we're going
to find out about a
powerful, automated testing
tool called QuickCheck.
This allows us to run randomly
generated tests on our code
to ensure the code meets certain
correctness properties that we
specify.
QuickCheck comes as part
of the Haskell platform,
so you should already
have access to it
on your own machine.
It's widely used in
the software industry.
For instance, many modern
telecom software products
are tested using QuickCheck.
OK, suppose we want to
implement a substitution cipher.
Let's do Caesar's cipher,
where we encode letters
by shifting them a
certain number of places
along in the alphabet.
In this example here, we
shift letters one place.
So add-- A-D-D in
the plaintext--
will become bee-- B-E-E--
in the ciphertext.
We might ask what plaintext
Z, the final letter
of the alphabet,
should be in code.
The answer is a.
The alphabet wraps round.
Properly, this is a rotation
rather than a shift.
First, we import the
Data.Char module,
which allows us to use utility
functions for manipulating
characters.
We select candidate
characters to cipher or encode
using the shouldcipher
function here.
Look at the type signature.
It's going to take a
character, a single character,
and return a Boolean that
tells us whether or not
this particular character
is going to be enciphered.
And we're only going to
want to cipher characters c
that are letters and are
ASCII character codes.
Haskell actually uses the
Unicode character set.
So this means we're only
going to encipher letters,
alphabetic letters, and
not numbers or punctuation
characters.
To encipher letters, then come
down to the next function here,
cipherchar.
We want to move letters along
in places in the alphabet,
where the number of places we
move them is the first argument
shift.
That's an integer.
And the second argument
is the original character,
the character in the plaintext.
And we're going to return
the character that's
the ciphered version of
our plaintext character.
So let's think about how
we're going to do this.
What we really want
to do is to add
a certain number of character
positions, the shift,
to the original character.
But c is a character,
and shift is an integer.
So actually, we have
to use the ord function
to turn the character
into an integer code.
And then add in the
shift and then use
the chr function to turn
the resulting integer back
into a character.
Type safety is important here.
We can't add integers
and characters directly.
Ord and chr might be familiar
to Python programmers,
for instance.
Now we only want to do
this in the situation
where the character--
that is, the input c--
is going to be a character
that's a letter that we ought
to cipher.
So let's say
shouldcipher c means
that we do this calculation.
And otherwise, we're
going to say, just
return the value c itself.
It might be a punctuation
character, or a space,
or another non-letter character.
Great, now what we want
to do is to-- let's
get rid of this comment--
map this cipherchar function
over the whole of the string.
And that's what the
next function does.
Cipher, do you see here?
It takes an integer shift
amount, a character list,
i.e. a string.
That's the plaintext.
And returns another character
list, which is the ciphertext.
So here's the definition here.
We're going to use
the map function.
And what we're mapping is
the cipherchar function
for a certain shift amount
mapped onto every character
in the plaintext.
Let's try out this code.
I'm going to save it.
So let's try this inside GHCi.
First, we'll load cipher.hs.
That's in the code directory.
And then we're going
to say cipher hello.
That's my string.
And we want to move
things along one space.
Sorry, one space.
There we are.
And we get the
enciphered message.
And then we'll do an
original Caesar message.
He'd normally move
things three places long.
Veni, vidi, vici.
And we get back a rather
unpronounceable string there,
which is its encoding.
Now for the decipher, we
want to shift letters back
in the opposite direction
to the encipher.
Look-- so decipher is going to
have the same type as decipher.
It's going to take an
integer shift amount.
The second parameter is going to
be the character amount shift.
And then it's going to return
to the decoded, deciphered
message.
So decipher shift ciphertext
is going to be-- well,
it's really just the
ciphering function,
but shifting in the
opposite direction.
But hopefully, this
ought to give us
the deciphered or
decrypted message.
So let's say reload.
And now we should be able to
use the decipher function.
If I say, decipher
3, and then I'm
going to copy and paste
this encoded string here.
I should get back
the original message.
And I do.
Now we want to check that
our code works properly.
Of course we know it
shouldn't because we haven't
done the wrapping around
the alphabet for Z.
Rather than devise a
number of test cases,
we will use the QuickCheck tool
to generate random input data
and see whether a correctness
property holds for our code.
The property we want to check
is, if we cipher a message
and then decipher it, we should
get back the original message.
First, let's import
the QuickCheck module.
Test.QuickCheck.
Make sure you get the
capital letters right.
Notice how the
interactive prompt now
has been modified to
include Test.QuickCheck
to show that it's loaded
into our environment.
Now let's ask QuickCheck
to check our property.
We need to encode the
property in Haskell.
So suppose we cipher a string
by shifting it n places.
The string is called s.
And then we decipher this string
using the same shift amount.
Then the answer we
ought to get back
should be equal to the
original string itself.
This is the property
we want to check.
We need to wrap this up
as a lambda abstraction.
So we're going to take n, which
is an integer, and then s,
which is a string.
And given these
two parameters, we
can then check that
when we decipher
the enciphered message, we
get back the original message.
Let's put some types here.
So we take an int,
n, the string, s.
And we're going to
return a Boolean, which
is the result of
the equality check.
OK.
And we're going to provide
this lambda abstraction
as an argument to the
QuickCheck function.
And look, it runs, and
then it says it failed.
And it's failed after six tests.
And here's where it's failed.
Look.
The shift amount is one, and the
string we're trying to cipher
is z.
If we shift z along
one place-- well,
let's do that and
see what happens.
cipher 1 z.
And then we end up
with the next character
in the character encoding,
which is open curly brace.
And now, if we try and decipher
this-- decipher 1 open curly
brace, it doesn't go
back to z, because look--
this is not a letter.
And we're only
ciphering letters.
And the definition of
decipher 1 curly brace
is of course cipher
minus 1 curly brace.
And ciphering doesn't work
for non-letter characters.
So this is the problem.
Our code fails because
it doesn't wrap around
the alphabet.
Our cipherchar doesn't do
the adjustment for wrapping.
So QuickCheck showed us
that our program is wrong.
Let's go back and write a
correct Caesar cipher code.
And in fact, I should have one
a little bit further down here.
So we need to check to see
whether our character, when
it's shifted, is going to
wrap around the alphabet.
So it's a lower character.
And it's character code
is greater than z
when we've done the shift.
Then yes, we need
to wrap around.
If it's an upper case character,
and its character code,
when we add the shift in,
is greater than an upper case Z,
Then yes, we need to wrap.
Otherwise, we don't.
So that's the wrap around.
And then this other
function here I've
called bettercipherchar takes
an integer shift amount,
a character to encode, and
then the encoded character.
And this does some
adjustments to make sure
that we wrap around the
alphabet if we need to.
You can download this code and
check it for yourself later on.
It's linked at the bottom
of this page in the course.
But what I'm going to do is
change the definition of cipher
to use bettercipherchar, rather
than the original cipherchar.
And now, hopefully when I go
back to shell and say reload,
and then try and
test my property
again with this
bettercipherchar,
it ought to work now.
So I want to QuickCheck
this expression.
Lambda n, that's
my shift amount.
Lambda s, that's my string.
And I want to check that when I
decipher the ciphered message,
then the thing I get back
is the original message.
I'm going to put
in the types again.
The types are helpful
for QuickCheck
to generate the right
kind of random input data.
Let's run this now, and
hopefully, it ought to pass.
Look, it says it
passed 100 tests, which
gives us some confidence
that it might be correct.
We can actually trace
the QuickCheck tests
to see what the
randomly generated
input data looks like.
Instead of using the
QuickCheck function--
I'm just going to
borrow that code there.
Instead, we use the
verboseCheck function instead.
VerboseCheck.
Let's run that, and we'll see
it generates the input data.
There it is scrolling up there.
It says for each test
whether it passes.
So in this last example here,
the shift amount is minus 42.
And here's the string,
very random string here
that was generated.
Some of the characters
aren't even printable.
But it passes all the tests.
Great, we've passed the tests.
A word of warning-- even
though the property is
correct for all tests, this
doesn't guarantee our code
is correct.
Edsger Dijkstra, a
famous computer scientist
once said, testing can
only show the presence
of bugs, not their absence.
However, QuickCheck
provides a nice way
to generate automated
random tests
to help us have more
confidence that our code is
doing what we want it to do.
[MUSIC PLAYING]